Welcome to The Test Set. Here we talk with some of the brightest thinkers and tinkerers
in statistical analysis, scientific computing, and machine learning, digging into what makes
them tick, plus the insights, experiments, and OMG moments that shape the field.
On this episode, we sit down with Marco Gorelli, Celtic folk shredder, Narwhals mastermind,
and software engineer at Quansight Labs. Welcome to The Test Set, where we explore
the people behind the data. I'm Michael Chow, a principal software engineer at Posit, and
I'm joined here with my co-host, Wes McKinney, creator of Pandas, co-creator of Aera, and
principal architect at Posit. And I think we're super pumped to have Marco with us,
who is a software engineer at Quansight, and creator of Narwhals, and also a maintainer
or former maintainer of Pandas, so doing a lot of DataFrame stuff. Marco, thanks so much
for coming on to The Test Set. I'm a giant fan of your work and just the rowdy party
that is the Narwhals Discord. So, so happy to have you on.
Yeah, thank you so much for having me. It's a pleasure to be here. In fact, Michael, I
think you might have been the first person, you and Rich, I think you might have been
the first people who I ever demoed Narwhals to.
Oh, wow. Yeah. Yeah, that's actually, I remember a lot of, this is almost like an open source
thing, like I remember having like an early chat. But that's actually crazy, I didn't
know that it was that early in the Narwhals process.
We met up to talk about something else, which was about great tables. And then I think I
just ended the call by saying, hey, check this thing that I just started over the weekend.
And sometimes your little weekend projects end up running away from you a bit and spiraling
out of control. And that's what's happened here.
Yeah, I love that. I mean, it's, it's been really cool to see and maybe for some background
context, I guess you're also a contributor to Pollers. So you've kind of spanned a lot
of these data frame libraries, Pollers, Pandas, Narwhals.
I mean, I'm embarrassed to say that I've actually never used Narwhals myself. I know what it
is, but probably there's plenty of people listening who aren't, who've never heard of
Narwhals. They're like, Narwhals? What is, what is that? So maybe, maybe you can explain,
explain the project and how, how it came about and, yeah, we can talk more about it.
Yeah, yeah, sure. I mean, I think it's very likely that you have used it, but accidentally,
in the sense that it's, it's intended as a compatibility layer between data frame libraries.
And it's not something that end users tend to use directly. Rather, it's something that
people tend to use as a transitive dependency. So they tend to use it because some library
that they're using is actually using Narwhals under the hood in order to be able to handle
multiple kinds of data frame inputs.
As an example, if you've been using Plotly since version six, then Narwhals is a required
dependency and it's used to do all of the data frame operations. And this allows it
to accept, let's say a Pollers data frame and keep all the computation native to Pollers
until it has to serialize it without having to convert to Pandas or to depend on Pandas.
And conversely, Pandas users can keep passing in Pandas data frames to Plotly without needing
to take on Pollers as a dependency. Like you can meet users where they are and both the
Pandas and Pollers and PyArrow user bases can just enjoy using their native tools with
Plotly and other data science tools without having to even necessarily know that Narwhals exists.
I was just looking and I saw that it has 43 million monthly downloads, so it's definitely
gotten some uptake. But to your point, I guess it's being picked up as a transitive dependency
in a number of projects. I'm familiar with the problem because in the early days of Pandas,
people would want to accept Pandas data frames in different libraries. I know that Scikit-learn
was one of those projects where people were like, I really just want to pass a Pandas
data frame into this project. But there was this challenge of, well, we can't require Pandas
as a hard dependency of Scikit-learn. But then what if people want to pass other types of
tabular data structures? And so, yeah, it seems like it's solving that problem and the
evidence is in the uptake of the project, which is great.
Cheers, thank you. It's interesting that you mentioned Scikit-learn, actually. I just got pinged
today on an issue in the repository where they're talking about using Narwhals because they do
currently accept both Pandas and Pollers, but they've got their own hand-rolled compatibility
code, which I think they're getting a little bit tired of maintaining. There's been some
issues reported, and it's the kind of situation where if they can outsource the work to a project
where the only thing that we're concerned about is handling compatibility between different data
frame libraries, then that can leave them to focus on their own competitive advantage.
If I'm understanding, you're saying a lot of libraries, they need to do a little bit of
data frame-like stuff. They want to take a tabular structure, they might want to choose
some columns or filter a little bit of data. So before Narwhals, or a lot of these kind of
compatibility tools, they were sort of stuck with being like, oh, well, I want to do a little bit of
data frame stuff, so I sort of need to choose a data frame to make a dependency and kind of build
on top of that. Yes, that's exactly right. Whereas Narwhals allows you to write your data
frame operations against the abstract idea of a data frame, and then whatever the user passes in
will use the user's library. Now, my expectation when starting it was that the pain points we'd
be addressing would be things like, I don't know, does group by maintain order? Or like
in the unique function, if you've got a null value, does that count as one unique value,
or do you have one unique per none, or do you not count null values at all?
And in the early days, I realized that actually the biggest pain points had to do with data types.
And like in Pandas, if you want an int64, there's currently three different ways of expressing an
int64 column. If you want a string column, there's even more. And unless you're actively,
very closely following developments in the Pandas GitHub repository, it's very difficult
to stay on top of it all. Yeah. Yeah, I could see that. Some of the details of some of these
data frame libraries can be a bit tricky for developers. Yes, exactly. I think we might have
had a discussion in GreatTables about this as well, where there was one of Pandas string data
types which was displayed in one way, but then if you used the PyArrow-backed string type, it was
displayed in a different way. But arguably, from an end-user perspective, it's just a string column.
Yeah. Yeah, totally. And this, I should say, so GreatTables is a tool I maintain that helps
display tables. And we don't use narwhals yet, because I think we
released before narwhals did, but we're ready, just to maybe hype you up, we're ready to switch
to narwhals for a lot of the things you said to take some of that burden off of wrangling different
types of data frame inputs, so people can just bring whatever data frame they want and get really
consistent stuff. But yeah, I wouldn't be surprised if some of this happens, as things go in and come
out, if they come out really different than maintainers expect, because it's just so many
details to keep track of. It's a big job that narwhals does.
Exactly. I mean, in the narwhals documentation, there's a why section where I try to answer why
would we need something like this anyway? And I give some examples of simple data frame operations
which look like they should be superficially the same between libraries, but actually behave
wildly differently. Now, I don't know if we'll get to it later on the topic of using AI tools
for development. And I don't, for a second, want to discount the value that AI tools can bring in
certain contexts. But for the development of narwhals, they've been incredibly frustrating,
because they just always spit out things that look plausible, but that actually are missing
some very key details. For example, if you ask an AI, what's the SQL equivalent of the
polar's N unique function? It'll tell you count distinct, except it's not actually equivalent,
because polar's counts null values in N unique, but count distinct doesn't. So you'll need to do
count distinct and then compensate for whether there were null values present or not.
I mean, the irony is that LLMs are notoriously bad at counting.
Yeah, that too.
Yeah, Wes, I feel like you've talked a bit about this, the challenge of even indexability. What
have LLMs trained on and absorbed from open source tools?
Yeah, well, there was a period of time, I think it's gotten better now, but there was a moment in
time where there was a gap between the present reality and when the training cutoff date was for
especially the earlier versions of ChatGPT or Claude. I think it's gotten a lot better, because
firstly, I think the training, the AI labs have done a better job of getting the
like tracking, getting their models closer to present day in terms of slurping up all of the
data on GitHub and all over the internet to keep the training data closer to the present day
whenever they release the models. That plus libraries like polar's have stabilized a little
more, like they aren't changing and refining nearly as quickly. And so just as a combination
of the models getting better, the training data getting better, and polar stabilizing. So now
I'm now using the coding agents to use polar's, like I've been using polar's to build a personal
finance side project. And yeah, it stubs its toes and it does things wrong, maybe 10% of the time
or 20% of the time, but it's a lot more effective. I feel comfortable, a lot more comfortable
using polar's with Claude than I did a year ago. Yeah, sure. So this was this money flow,
was it? Something like that? Yeah, yeah. Just saw some announcement about that. Yeah, looks good.
Funnily enough, the first time I met Richie Vink, who is the creator of polar's was at Euro SciPy,
I think in 2023. And I remember at the time we had a little discussion and we were saying,
ah, should group by actually be group underscore by? Because that's generally the philosophy that
polar's follows in its API, but group by was just a single word, I think just for compatibility,
just because he'd taken it from what pandas was doing. So he said, yeah, sure. Let's change it.
Seems like a minor thing. What's the worst that can happen? And then GPT got super popular and
the cutoff date was just before that deprecation was introduced. It was phenomenally bad timing.
I'm relieved that this didn't kill the project. But I think it was a good idea to change it anyway.
It is kind of nice that now polar's has got to the point where the API is really consistent in
its naming. You always know that if you've got a method with multiple names, it's always snake case.
We did the same thing with group by in Ibis, which maybe has a slightly similar type of vibe
to narwhals, but different goals. But partially when designing the API of Ibis,
there was a goal of deliberately placing distance between the perceived sins of the
pandas API, making things a little more normalized and consistent. But it's interesting because
it's nice that now we have this whole idea of having an expression system and being able to
express complex aggregations or complex data frame operations with a lazy expression system.
Going back in time, we really didn't have that. But now it's nice that we have the type system
of arrow and modern databases with nested types to provide some structure for like,
okay, these are all the things that expression systems need to support. And then polar's
designed its expression system to be able to do all of the fancy things you can do inside polar's
aggregations, and narwhals has adopted that. It seems like there was an effort to maybe push some
of that upstream into pandas. I heard rumblings of pd.col. I always wanted to have an expression
system within pandas, but it was one of those things that even today, my eyes bleed when I
look at people trying to do complex aggregations in pandas, and they're passing lambda functions.
I'm like, no, that destroys the performance. The nature of open source, we're never quite
where we want to be, but we're always working and trying to make progress.
Yeah, and I think pd.col is out. I think they released pd.col, is that?
Marco, were you responsible for that or was that you're doing?
I opened the pull request, yeah. Maybe just to clarify, it's not as nice as I would like it to
be. It can only be used in places where pandas already accepts callables. For example, lock,
and get item, and assign, those are the big ones. In group, it would require some other upstream
changes in pandas, which I didn't yet have the capacity to do. But it's interesting that you
bring up how central the concept of expressions became, and I totally agree. I think it's just
so important to be able to express the abstract idea of an operation that you want to do without
any of the objects in the expression having to be tied to any particular data frame.
When Narwhals started, it was somewhat in response to a previous effort at trying to
standardize data frame APIs, where one of the major points of contention that I had with the
other participants was on the concept of expressions. When other people wanted to keep
the API much more tied to data frames in series, those were the two main objects they wanted,
whereas I wanted expressions. That was one of the major points that we just were not able to
get agreement on, unfortunately. But I'm glad that in the years that have since passed,
the concept of expressions has become really popular, and users certainly seem to enjoy it.
You mentioned IBIS having expressions, and in fact, I think IBIS took expressions from SUBA,
which was a project started by Michael. So we've really come full circle here in this
chat. There are a lot of arrows pointing to a lot of different places
in this chat. It is funny because I do think that IBIS adopting lazy expressions is actually
what really made me feel good about IBIS. IBIS is so powerful. I'll just summarize again. I know
it's come up. It's a tool to basically a data frame API that could fire on, say, a SQL backend
or a Pandas data frame. I think they have support for pollers and things like DuckDB,
so it's a nice way to use a single API to fire a lot of places. These types of tools are
so critical, I think, as a human being. To just be able to think in one data frame and fire
a lot of places is such a relief. But it is funny, when I was thinking about building SUBA,
I did try IBIS. For me, coming from R, it did involve a lot of lambdas that was a bit
cumbersome. But I think, to that team's credit, once they rolled out lazy expressions and they
really got cooking on a lot of different stuff, I feel like they really created such a powerful...
Yeah, at that time, IBIS didn't have the underscore, the generic expression,
so you would have to start from a referenceable expression object in order to build subsequent
expressions, whereas the underscore allows you to build an expression and then it late-binds
and resolves the expression within the expression tree when it's compiling.
But it's a good example. I started on IBIS in 2015, and initially, around that time,
there was another project that was being developed at Anaconda, formerly Continuum Analytics,
called Blaze. It was a similar expression system trying to tie together NumPy and
Pandas-like operations, as well as potentially... This is the same era where
Dask was created by Matthew Rocklin. I was working with a lot of SQL engines, and so IBIS
was essentially an effort to try to reconcile the relational algebra of SQL databases with
DataFrame operations. So it started from the standpoint, not necessarily of being...
So this is where I say the vibe is similar to narwhals, but the objective, the end goal,
is different, whereas rather than being a portability layer to enable libraries to
write code once and target different DataFrame libraries, IBIS' goal actually was to have
a DataFrame-like API that could express all of the concepts that are found in modern SQL.
And so if you're using Postgres and Postgres has these fairly normal concepts in relational
algebra and in databases that don't really exist in Pandas, for example, ideas like correlated
and uncorrelated subqueries and anti-joins and semi-joins and different things that are very
normal in the... Actually things that do exist in dplyr, for the record, but stuff that was
normal in the database world, but there hadn't been that much database technology that had
trickled through to the Python ecosystem. So it's interesting, but it's nice that these
projects have influenced each other and have... Again, that's the magic of open source that
people have good ideas and every project should curate everybody's best ideas and
use them to be better and to make improvements and not be stuck in the way that things are
and be willing to give credit where credit's due. And so I'm very excited
about where things are and the general trajectory of things. So compared with
10 years ago, it feels like a world of difference. So I have to give credit to everyone and all the
work that they've done to get to where we are today.
Absolutely. And it's impressive just how many projects you've been involved in that have then
played such a central role in this.
I like to tinker, but I also like to collaborate. I like to work with people. And so sometimes
people are often saying, hey, you worked on this or you built that or you built that. But
honestly, the most satisfying parts for me of doing open source have been the people that
I've met along the way, the collaborations that I've been able to have, finding smart people who
are really motivated about working on a certain problem and trying to figure out, okay, how do we
work together? How do we find the best path forward, build things that people like, get them
out there, get them released, help them get adopted and all that. I'm curious about how,
I mean, Marco, how you got involved in this space and maybe what's driven you to work on these
problems, because it's not working on expression systems and abstract data frame APIs and those
sorts of things. It's not. There are problems that appeal to certain people, but not all.
People love using the libraries, but actually building them is another thing entirely.
And so we're here on a call with a podcast with all three of us have worked on different
lazy expression systems for data frames. And so I think that's maybe the first time I've been,
maybe it would be nice if Philip Cloud was here and maybe Matthew Rockland, we would have
a whole group full of intermediate representation expression system fanatics.
Yeah, totally. Yeah, sure. So how did I get interested in this space? What made me want to
spend a big chunk of my time and now, fortunately, some part of my job tackling this problem?
Perhaps just quickly before I answer this, since IBIS has come up a few times, just to clarify,
it's not in competition with Narwhals at all. In fact, Narwhals supports IBIS as an input.
So you can choose to use IBIS with a Narwhals front end if you wish to.
Yeah, I don't think, I don't regard the projects as competitors, but I agree that to an onlooker
who isn't familiar with, isn't enmeshed in this ecosystem that superficially, when you squint,
you squint at these projects from afar, they do look very similar. But when you actually get
involved in the details, there's what it feels like to actually use the library day to day.
And so when I was saying that the vibe is similar, I feel like the vibe is like the
feeling of using the software is a little bit similar, but the goals and the objectives of
the project and what it's trying to do, that's where there's the divergence.
But I can admit that trying to explain that to people on LinkedIn or on X or Blue Sky or
something can be a little bit tricky. So yeah, to get back to the question,
what got me interested in the space originally, I was really just frustrated with the fact that I
was a huge fan of Polars. I really liked using Polars. I really liked contributing to Polars.
But then one of the most frequent complaints I heard from prospective users was that when they
went to use their favorite data science tools, they either had to convert everything to Pandas
or the tool would claim to support Polars, but under the hood, it was just converting to Pandas.
There are some cases when that's okay. You really don't see the effect of it,
but there are cases when the performance penalty can be quite large, like converting a string to
object in Pandas can be quite expensive. There are some data types that don't exactly match.
And perhaps one that I really felt strongly about in terms of missed opportunities was that Polars
has both a lazy and an eager API, whereas Pandas is purely eager. So having to convert everything
to Pandas, when there were some operations which could in principle have been done lazily,
it really felt like a missed opportunity. It felt like it should have been possible to do much
better. And I could see that some libraries were doing what you were doing in Great Tables,
Michael, where you had your own hand-rolled compatibility layer. Scikit-learn was doing
something similar. HP Plot had their compatibility layers for QDF and Dask and others.
There were some other libraries that were doing similar things. So I just figured,
well, let's try to make something reusable. And we need to choose a common API.
Originally, I thought about using the Pandas API, but I found that it was a bit frustrating to try
to transpile Polars to Pandas, whereas doing it in the other way around, it just worked beautifully.
The Polars API is stricter than Pandas. And arguably, when it comes to doing transpilation,
it's easier to start from users writing something in a stricter API,
and then transpiling that to the less strict one. Also, Pandas has the concept of an index
that Polars doesn't have. So if the user does not have to write index code directly,
then that's one less thing to worry about. So I just tried this. And you can see in the early
commit messages in novels before I released it, when I was just writing it by myself as a
little one-person experiment, the commit messages start saying things like,
ooh, it works! Getting there! Three exclamation marks. I was really excited at first.
At some point, I published it online and started enforcing pull requests and reviews and all of
that. But for better or for worse, those early commit messages that I was just writing to myself
are still there in the project history. But it's actually not too bad to see the
excitement that I was feeling at the beginning when I realized that actually transpiling Polars,
translating Polar syntax to Pandas was fairly satisfying. So really, that was the original
motivation, just trying to solve this ecosystem problem where we had all of these really nice
data frames out there. But frustratingly, the data science ecosystem was locked in to Pandas.
The first time I presented novels, after having showed it on a call to Michael,
was at PyCon Lithuania in 2023. And I ended the presentation by saying that my hope for
the next year was that we would see the data science ecosystem become less locked into Pandas,
and that maybe we would also see Duolingo add a Lithuanian course. And only one of these things
happened. I think there's still no way to learn Lithuanian on Duolingo, but hopefully they'll
address that as well. I'm super curious to hear about, to go back to Wes's question,
how you got into some of this. And also, I know Narwhals has this really active Discord community.
I'd be really curious to hear some of the outreach you did. How did you get involved,
and what did you do early on to build out the Narwhals community? Because it's a happening
place. It's a pretty sweet crew you've got. Sure, yeah. So you're asking how did I get
started with the project? Yes, I've covered the motivation, which was about not having
data science tools all locked into Pandas, and about physically how it started. I just put it
out there. I remember sending it to some newsletters, and to my surprise, people started
checking out the repository, giving it stars. And I got a bit of a signal that, okay, maybe it
can be useful. Maybe people like the idea. And the original name for the project was Polars API
Compat. The idea was that it would just make other APIs compatible with the Polars API.
And then I figured, wait a second, I really want this to become popular.
That's not going to work in the present day and age, is it? We need an entertaining name. People
want to be entertained. And all data science popular projects seem to be named after animals.
So I looked on the Wikipedia page on the list of animals that had not yet been taken,
and I found Puffin. Seems like the perfect name, but unfortunately,
there was already a Python package called Puffin. And then I found Nowells, which immediately
reminded me of that viral Mr. Weeble song about Nowells. And I thought, I can't call it this.
People will just think of the meme. But actually, that ended up being the biggest strength.
You see the project, you already feel entertained, and you already get a bit of a sense of fun.
And that's something we've tried to keep throughout the contributing process. When
people submit pull requests, I don't just approve it. I give them a little Nowell gif.
And yeah, I love how other people who I then added as maintainers also took on the practice
and give each other celebratory Nowells gifs on their successful pull request reviews.
It's honestly really sweet. Yeah, super sweet to see gifs linging, I feel like, in a repo.
Yeah. We were thinking about making an official list of Nowells approved gifs to use in pull
request reviews. On the rest of the community, I feel like I need to give a shout out to Ines
Pawson, who is from Open Teams, which is like a sister company of QuantSite Labs.
And she was one of the first people to really believe in the Nowells project. And she encouraged
me to start a community call and a Discord and a way for contributors to interact in a low pressure
environment. Because if you've got a GitHub page, in theory, anyone can communicate with the project.
In practice, a lot of people don't really feel comfortable just asking a casual question by
opening an issue. They feel like it's a very serious place and that GitHub issues aren't
really an appropriate place to banter or to just have a casual chat about what you're doing with
the project. Nor is it an appropriate place to showcase things that you might have built using
the project. But if you've got a Discord with several channels, then people are more than
welcome to do that and really need to give a credit for having encouraged me to do this early
on. I did not think that there would be any interest. I thought it would just be like a
dead Discord server, but no. Contributors started hanging out there, helping each other out,
sharing things. The best thing that's happened, as far as I'm concerned, is the study group.
So I think weekly or bi-weekly, some regular contributors meet for what they call the
novels study group, in which they just share learnings that they've made while contributing
to novels and they help each other out with making sense of lots of topics. They've had a
lot of discussions around the type system in novels. In novels, we take typing very seriously.
There's a lot of typing shenanigans going on, but if you want compatibility between APIs,
then I think that's a fairly important thing to do.
It's cool to think about that. Doing a contribution where you wire some stuff up
is maybe a good step into a study group, that pipeline from contribution to study group
in narwhals. It's interesting to hear that kind of dynamic brought to the front of a Discord.
Nicely, yeah. The group really has gone beyond novels in the sense that it usually starts off
with some topic that they might have encountered while contributing to novels. For example,
what's a protocol? What does it mean for a type var to be covariant? And then they
explore this deeply, try to understand this, try to make analogies.
Yeah, it's really been very rewarding to see that happen.
I feel like there's a period of time where you were almost showing up in any place
that made any mention of narwhals. It was like a way to summon you. Is that true?
Yeah, there is some truth to this. I realized when I published my first open source project
back during the initial COVID outbreak, it was called NBQA. It was a little quality assurance
tool for Jupyter Notebooks. At the time, my assumption was that if you published a tool
and it had a bug, somebody would open an issue and tell you about it, and then you fixed the bug,
and then it would be better for everyone else. And that's when I realized, no, most people,
if they try a tool and they find a bug, they uninstall it and they move on to something else
without even reporting the bug. But GitHub makes it easy to just do a site-wide search for mentions
of keywords. So just searching around for mentions of the word, I started seeing issues that people
were running into that they weren't even reporting. I just figured, ah, this is so valuable. This is
so useful. I can address these things. And so when I started Narwhals, I was just already
used to having to proactively look for issues that people might be encountering
rather than relying on them to report things. So yes, I would just do GitHub searches for mentions
of Narwhals. Fortunately, Narwhals is a fairly unique name. So most mentions that came up were
exactly of this project. And if I saw projects saying, oh, yeah, we should maybe consider
looking into this Narwhals project, I was just so keen on getting the ball rolling
that I would show them how it could be done, or in some cases, even open a pull request to them
showing, hey, here's a proof of concept of how you can Narwhalify your code base.
And that was so valuable. You just realize so many things about your tool once you actually start
trying to use it to solve a problem. The dogfooding process is just so valuable.
For anyone wanting to start a tool, that's probably the best thing you can do to make
it usable. Just try using it yourself for an extended period of time.
Yeah. Yeah, I love that. And I will say, I know we got some experience of that, too,
on the Shiny team at Posit for PyShiny. Some engineers from the PyShiny team and you got to
pair, and I got to ride along. And just as you were like, I'll jump on a call if you want to
roll Narwhals in. And I do feel like it really gassed them up to just have you there,
break things down, and even explain how Narwhals could do the things that they asked to have that
answered so fast was, I feel like, really impressive to just have the person on a call
kind of like clearing the path. Thank you. I think people, sometimes people
underestimate how important the social part of open source is, as opposed to purely the technical
part. Maybe a nice example of why this is so important. The first major library to start
using Narwhals was the Altair visualization library. And originally, I would have thought
there's no way that they would trust a small project like Narwhals or consider taking it on
as a required dependency. But I remember in the GitHub discussion about it, that one of the Altair
maintainers had said that he'd seen a talk that I'd done in person at PyCon Germany. He liked the
talk I'd given. He liked how it would come across to the audience and all of that. And so, because
he already knew me, because I'd already earned a bit of social capital in their world, they felt
that they could trust this project that I'd put out. So, talking at conferences, putting yourself
out there, generally trying to be a good member of the community, it can really pay off later if
you want people to trust something that you've built. Yeah, it's super cool to see. Wes, are
you doing... I know you've mentioned Moneyflow a little bit, the open source tool you've been
tinkering on. Are you rolling into any places or getting the word out, surfing GitHub?
I mean, that's just a nights and weekends thing that was also an experiment to see,
to learn more about building a new open source project from scratch,
using cloud code as the main driver. So, it's done all the CICD, it built the docs,
the website, pretty much everything is AI generated. I put it on LinkedIn and on Twitter
and things like that, but it's really a side project. And if nobody uses it, it's actually
fine because I use it to do my personal accounting and keep track of my expenses.
And I think what's interesting about this new era of AI-assisted coding is that you can build a
totally custom tool for yourself in a short amount of time and in a way that would never have made
sense in the past. This is a tool that maybe if it was my own time coding from by scratch,
maybe I could have built it in three or four weekends, spending eight hours per weekend,
and I could have built it all myself, so I didn't need a coding agent to build it.
But I could build it basically while sitting on the couch watching Netflix, sipping tea,
and occasionally interacting with the agent. And I could build a totally custom tool for myself
that's customized to my particular needs and not feel bad about it or feel like I'm over-engineering,
yak-shaving something just to save myself five minutes now and then, which is kind of the reality.
There's that XKCD comic, it's like, how do you justify building something to save yourself time?
And I think now if it's building some custom widget that saves you a little bit of time here
and there, you can justify doing that with coding agents, especially stuff that involves a lot of
just interacting with web APIs. So simple stuff like that, it's not suited for like,
you aren't going to build a new Apache Aero with cloud code, at least not yet,
but you can build a CRUD app for working on your personal finances.
In terms of social capital, it sounds like this money flow is like a personal tool that you're
happy to share with people, but it's not your primary goal that this gets a lot of adoption.
The impression I get is that what's maybe been the greatest driver or source of satisfaction for
you has been enabling what I've heard you refer to as the composable data system, where you think
about how different tools are working together. And I presume that they're the social capital.
Yeah, I mean, that's been, in terms of professionally the last 10 years,
like building the composable data stack, like creating Apache Aero and now the greater Aero
ecosystem of like Aero database, Aero native database connectivity, ADBC, DataFusion,
DuckDB, kind of like two of the embeddable execution engines that are designed for use with
Aero. There's now a bunch of like new file formats. Like I was, I got very involved in
parquet development in the early, you know, mid 2010s, because you couldn't read parquet
files in Python. And that was just completely unacceptable. But it's nice that, you know,
AI has come around and enabled me to like scratch itches that things that I've thought about for
several years, but I could just never justify taking time away from my main, you know, work
projects to, you know, work on. I couldn't spare energy on nights and weekends because I needed to
save that energy for like maintaining open source projects or, you know, working on a new edition of
my book or things like that. But that's like, I think, you know, I think that's the best way to
look at some of these AI tools. This is a way to like do work that like, you know, delegate work
that is suitable for AI and work that you don't want to do, that you would benefit from, but you
don't want to do it yourself because it will drain too much of your energy or, you know, it just
would take time away from stuff that actually is the more valuable work that you could be doing,
like enable you to focus on the things that really matter.
It is really interesting too. I feel like these types of tools, whether it's like a composable
data stack ecosystem or narwhals, kind of like undergirding and connecting a lot of pieces
versus a sort of more tightly scoped thing like money flow where you're like, oh, I have this
personal problem. And actually I could tell you right away if it feels good to like use this tool
on it. I feel like it's such an interesting dynamic, like those tools that are more kind of
like ecosystem, social, infrastructural, versus one where you have like a quick feedback loop
with yourself where you're like, I'm like feeling good. And it is interesting that I do feel like
for AI projects, I've also, it's been interesting to like spin up personal libraries and just kind
of see like, am I having a good time so fast? Like that feedback loop.
Well, one question I have for Marco, I'd be interested in what it's been like because
narwhals is a newer project. And so people are, many people are hearing about it for the first
time in the last year or two. And so I feel like there's like AI is definitely shaping the way that
people learn about new open source projects and how they interact with them. And so like we spoke
earlier in the podcast about like the challenges of like, you know, LLMs being able to keep up with
the latest API changes and projects, but how people will discover and start using a totally
new piece of software is a little bit like an open question. Like I'm concerned that maybe people
won't be motivated to use anything new that their LLM assistants don't already know about.
And so you're kind of hopeful that eventually like the AI labs will index your project's
documentation and figure out how to use the project on their own and then start offering
suggestions to the users. But essentially it creates this chicken and egg problem where like
the models are dependent on training data to understand how to best use these projects.
But if people won't use the projects and create the training data, then how will the LLMs ever
bootstrap and get to a point where they become experts in how to use your new open source
projects? So I wonder, do you feel like you see the effects of that in Narwhals and like how
responsive, I mean, it sounds like you've got a community of people that are contributing to the
project and really active in development and you get feedback from them. But often I find in open
source, like the feedback from the community, from the user base can often be delayed by three to six
months because it might take, you know, six months before somebody to even pick up, you know, the last
release that you made or the release that you made six months ago and start to wrap their mind around
things that you added or changes that you've made. Yeah, that's absolutely, it's absolutely been at
the top of my mind. So when I started the project, I thought it was fairly important to make something
that felt familiar to people. So that's why I chose the top level API. I decided it would just
be a subset, like a strict subset of the Polars API. So like this, the, whatever work in indexing
LLMs have to do to familiarize themselves with the Polars API, it should automatically transfer
to Narwhals. They only need to learn some extra things like from native and to native for how to
get in and out of the library. Seeing as composability has been brought up as well as
data fusion, something that we've just released this week has been Narwhals Daft. So this is a
plugin for Narwhals and this is the first plugin that we release. And it's intended to be a
reference for how to write Narwhals plugins. And what I'm envisioning here is really something
like a composable ecosystem where in Narwhals, we have some protocols which just define what
methods, some expression classes, some data frame classes, and some namespaces need to implement.
And as long as libraries implement those and they hook things up correctly using the plugin
architecture, then they can become Narwhals compatible for free. So this means there's
any code base written using Narwhals like Plotly, Altair, Scikit-Lego, et cetera. It means you can
pass in a Daft data frame as long as you've got your plugin installed. And it also means that
people can make plugins for their own systems. Like I'm hoping that either we or somebody can
make a Data Fusion plugin. Somebody can make just like a pure Python dictionary plugin. Somebody
can make a plugin for Bodo. Like lots of other tools are coming out, it's not really feasible
for us to maintain all of them in a library that is meant to stay lightweight. But what we can do
is we can define a plugin mechanism. We can define some protocols that people can follow,
and then hopefully the ecosystem can just become composable from people following it.
Just for people listening, how would you define a plugin? Like what is a plugin?
By this I mean an extra library that you can install, which is an optional add-on. So by
default, if you install Narwhals, it'll support Pandas, Polos, Pyarro, Modin, QDF.
Dask, Ibis, SQL Frame, PySpark, DuckDB. Hope I've not forgotten anyone. It'll support these inputs.
And if you install a plugin, like the Narwhals Daft plugin, it'll also accept Daft. If when we
have the Narwhals Data Fusion plugin, if you install that, it'll also support Data Fusion and
so on. So I think like this, we should be able to really empower the community to make their own
little plugins that can compose with everything else. Yeah, that's really exciting. So it doesn't,
people can make some of these that don't have to live inside the Narwhals community.
They can kind of like build them out on their own, but still work and integrate with Narwhals.
Yeah, that's exactly what we're aiming to enable, yes. Just looking more broadly, anything
you're really excited about in the Python ecosystem more generally?
Overall, I'm really excited about people solving quote-unquote boring problems.
And so be it enabling tools to compose better with each other, be it the typing,
like just the static typing in Python that just keeps getting better with each new Python release.
I think when it started to come out, people were often very skeptical about it,
feelings were mixed, but recent Python releases, like it's just, it's getting really solid. It's
getting much better. So I'm very excited about that. I like the advent of tools like DuckDB,
which even like the creators describe as a quote-unquote boring project.
And yeah, I hope that we can have more of this. And even, yeah, what Wes was talking about,
you know, file formats. I think there's just so much that we can solve to make the experience
of working with technology more efficient and more pleasurable.
Yeah. Yeah, that's so powerful to hear. And I definitely, I don't doubt that a lot of boring
problems, you know, deep in the ecosystem will make lives way better for users kind of across
the board. Totally. So there's one piece of advice somebody once gave me. Unfortunately,
I can't remember who, but it was that if there's something you find interesting that other people
find boring, then you've just found your competitive advantage. So to anyone listening,
if you happen to stumble on a problem that you find interesting and other people just don't seem
very excited about it, well, maybe don't give up on it. Maybe try to go really deep on it and you
might just discover something that you can make an impact on and that can be very rewarding.
Yeah, that's incredible. I feel like that's such helpful advice. I guess maybe one thing I do want
to close out on that I feel like we can't leave out is as a personal tidbit, I think you mentioned
for fun, just MarcoFact, you like to jam out for little Celtic folk sessions. Is that,
could you take us on a tour of that, Marco, you know, Celtic folk, Marco? Sure. Well, in fact,
just after this call, I'm going to head to the Irish pub in Cardiff. There's an Irish-themed
session this evening. So we're going to play a mix of tunes, some Irish traditional music,
some crowd pub pleasers. And yeah, that's my favourite thing to do outside of work,
just learning songs, mostly on guitar, which I've played for the last 20 years or so.
Yeah, I think it's a good way to disconnect from work and kind of escape into a different world.
And it's a very fun way to meet people who you otherwise wouldn't get the chance to meet
as part of your work. Do you ever, have you ever jammed out on Celtic folk at like a
Pi Data or have you taken it on the road? Oh yeah, yeah. So in Quonsight, the company I work
for, there's quite a few people who play instruments. The company founder, Travis
Oliphant, is an incredible singer. So when we have our meetups, we always make sure to reserve
some time in the agenda for jam sessions. And for me, those are the highlights of the trips. And I
know that other people, and a lot of other people feel similarly. Music really has this power to
bring people together and connect them. Yeah, that's so cool. Wait, I love that y'all are
getting together and are able to do that. So I do a little bit of contra dance
down the street every week. And I know that, are there people boogieing? Do you have people
dancing or is it just, you're just jamming out? So sometimes people dance, yeah.
Is that person ever you? Are you strictly?
Usually I'm just so focused and excited by the music that I'm too busy playing it. I'm also not
particularly good at dancing, so I wouldn't be the person to lead that. Well, Marco, I feel like
I feel like so honored to have us all to have you and Wes in a podcast. I feel like
life with data frames and analyzing data has been made so much better in Python today
by you focusing on this problem, just how to connect things and how to interchange.
And I do think that your emphasis on boring problems, like I feel like we're all so much
better today because you're thinking about how every data frame thing can talk to every other
data frame thing. And so, yeah, so excited to have you on today and to hear a bit about your
process and the things you're working on. It's been an absolute pleasure. Thanks for having
been encouraging about the project when I first showed it to you. I think it makes such a
difference when the first person you show something to is encouraging. And yeah, for anyone
listening, if people show you something, maybe it doesn't hurt to say something positive and
encourage people to take it further. Yeah. Yeah, that's huge. Well, thanks. Yeah. Thanks so much
for coming on and really excited to see what you do with Narwhals over the next year. Thanks. It's
been an absolute blast. And now, if you'll excuse me, I need to go and tune up. This is it. Celtic
folk. Let's go. Thank you, Marco. All right. Thanks. Thank you.
The Test Set is a production of PositPVC, an open source and enterprise tooling data
science software company. This episode was produced in collaboration with creative studio
AGI. For more episodes, visit thetestset.co or find us on your favorite podcast platform.